Today we continue our series, The Light is Coming, and nothing will be the same.
And we continue the series with the theme when light moves into the neighborhood.
Join me now in the reading of the Gospel lesson from Matthew, the first chapter
8 verses 18 through 25.
Please stand for the reading of the gospel.
It will be on your screens.
You are also invited to open your electronic devices and Bibles and join me in the gospel of Matthew verses 18 through 25.
Now the birth of Jesus, the Messiah took place in this way.
When his mother Mary had been engaged to Joseph, but before they lived together, she was found to be pregnant from the Holy Spirit.
Her husband Joseph, being a righteous man and unwilling to expose her to public disgrace, planned to divorce her quietly.
But just when he had resolved to do this,
An angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary as your wife.
For the child conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
She will bear a son and you are to name him Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.
All this took place to fulfill what had been spoken by the Lord through the prophet.
Look, the virgin shall become pregnant and give birth to a son, and they shall name him Immanuel, which means God is with us.
When Joseph awoke from sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord commanded him.
He took her as his wife.
but had no marital relations with her until she had given birth to a son.
And Joseph named him Jesus.
This is the word of God for the people of God.
Thanks be to God.
Let us pray.
Lord, here we are to worship.
Here we are to bow down.
Here we are to say that you are indeed our worthy and holy God.
We have not gathered in this place to hear a word from Jasmine.
We have gathered in this place expecting you to speak to our hearts and our minds and our souls.
So speak, Lord, for your servants are listening.
Hide this, your servant behind that old rugged cross so that everything that is said and everything that is done comes straight from you.
Oh God, this is our servant's prayer in the name of Jesus, the Christ we pray.
Amen.
You may be seated.
When I was a little kid, there was an epic snowstorm in Atlanta.
We lived in one of those western neighborhoods where the
the curb was about this thick and it was lined with granite.
Anybody remember old Atlanta with those tall thick curves?
So when it iced over, we had a literal ice rink on our street.
The ice was thick, Mike, and all the kids came running out of their homes and using whatever they could to
Ice skate, Lisa.
We had roller blades and wagons and bicycles.
I don't know why we thought we were going to ride bicycles on ice, but anything that had wheels or anything that we could turn into a sled became a tool for ice sledding and ice skating.
It's amazing what a kid can come up with if you just let their imagination run wild.
It's amazing what we could do if we threw away the rules that keep us bound and allow God to give us tools to do extraordinary things.
You know what?
That day I met people I'd never met.
Everybody was outside.
the people who drove into their garages and you never saw them, you finally got to meet them in the ice skating rink.
The people who had opposite hours, maybe they worked at night.
Well, you were gone during the day, they were home, but you never really got a chance to talk to them because they had opposite hours and you never saw them.
And even the neighbors who were, you know, a little bit introverted and didn't really want to talk to other neighbors, bless God.
They came out and
And they for took and somebody brought out some coffee and then somebody brought out some hot chocolate and then somebody brought out some snacks and everybody began to join together.
And instead of houses on a street, strangers that travel in the same way, it became a neighborhood.
See, the difference between the place where you live in the neighborhood is that there are people there who you know and you are connected to and you are forming as a community, you are forming relationships, you are forming a way to be invited into a larger picture.
If we say boarded up in our homes or in our safe places, we get what we call an echo chamber.
We hear the same thing over and over again.
We see the same thing over and over again.
And we forget that there is life beyond us.
Some of you know that I love national geographic.
I always have, since we were little kids, some of you might remember, some of you are in my generation, some of you are parents of kids in the generation, that every month you could get a pack of cards with animals from National Geographic, and you had a big green case, we still have ours, and my mom's basement, yes, she wants me to get my stuff out of there.
And he told you all about the animals each week.
So now, I watch National Geographic on TV all the time.
And there are a series of shows called Life Below Zero.
And on Life Below Zero, we meet people who live all over Alaska.
Did you know that Alaska just became a state in the United States in 1959?
Recent history.
And before that it was territory for indigenous people, people who were native to the land, people who had different tribes and different ways of being who lived off the land.
Now they didn't necessarily have running water or lights to turn on, but they had light.
They had light in relationships and how they gathered in their traditions and in the way that they lived, they could make fire out of nothing.
But some of us believe that our ways are better than other people's ways.
And we co-op and colonize.
And we make people meld into our sense of what the neighborhood might be.
One of the participants on Life Below Zero is Ask a Baskin.
It's a type of indigenous Native American who lives in Alaska in the Tundra right below the tree line.
Here in Georgia, we don't know what that is.
because there are trees everywhere, but there is a line at the Arctic Circle where it is too cold for trees to grow.
He said, in one of his interviews, he said, we used to fight over the land.
All the different tribes, that was how we interacted with each other.
We used to fight over the land.
But in 1959, they came in Stoltlerland, and we don't have anything to fight about anymore.
So we decided not to find a new thing to fight about.
We decided that we would find a way to take care of each other.
In the Gospel of Matthew,
We find that Matthew chapter one starts with a long list of people.
It's what we call a genealogy.
It is a list that tells us how we get from David, how we get from Abraham to Jacob to Joseph to Ruth to David.
To Uzziah, you remember in the year that King Uzziah died, I saw the Lord.
To Solomon, to Jehoshaphat, to Hezekiah, to Amos, all the way to Joseph and Jesus.
This neighborhood is made up of ordinary people who have done extraordinary things to allow us to see God keeps God's promise to us.
Abraham is the answer to a promise and the receiver of a promise.
His Jacob is the receiver of a promise that continues through Abraham.
David is the receiver in the fruit of a promise that was first given to Abraham and on and on and on and Jesus becomes the ultimate answer to the promises of God from the prophet Isaiah that said, and there shall be a child.
There shall be light.
We shall call him wonderful counselor, Prince of Peace, mighty God.
There shall be a little girl who is fresh with child.
And she would not have done anything wrong.
But people assume things.
And they will assume that she has broken the rules that she has hung out with her dude Joseph way before she was supposed to.
And they will want to punish her.
Because those are the rules.
And instead angels showed up.
And they said two things that we ought not forget.
They said, when God is with us, Emmanuel, I, Angel Gabriel, and all the other angels who have shown up and here to tell you that God is Emmanuel, that God is with us, that God never leaves us nor forsakes us, that when it is dark outside, God is at God's best to bring the light into the world.
And the second thing they say is do not be afraid.
I know what it looks like.
I know what it feels like.
I've seen the people counting their dollars in the grocery store line.
I've seen the people sleeping outside on the church property.
I know that times are hard.
I've seen the layoff slips and all of the things that are going on, the gas prices, the grocery prices, I have seen the darkness.
And God says, I am sending you light.
Not just sending light, but I am sending you light.
It has your name on it.
It's coming to your neighborhood.
And it's so personal.
that I planned for it before you were even knit together in your mother's womb.
I planned for this light even before you were aware that there was a difference between darkness and light.
I planned for this even before you had bad days and good days.
I planned for it even when people started shooting and when they started starving each other.
I planned for it before any of this has happened.
And Joseph.
Don't worry about your plans.
I've got plans.
I want you to dig into for just a minute with me here.
It says, in verse 19, her husband Joseph, being a righteous man and unwilling to expose her to public disgrace, plan to divorce her quietly.
Wait a minute, I thought you said they were engaged.
What does righteous mean?
Well, back in that day, if you were engaged, you might as well have been married because the only way to get out of it was a divorce.
And back in those days, if you were pregnant before you were married, even if you were engaged, you were to be stoned to death.
But the text says that Joseph was a righteous man.
That meant that Joseph thought that grace and mercy was more important than the rules.
that Joseph understood that Jesus has come to fulfill the law, not to throw it over, but he comes in a different way than the Old Testament rules.
The Old Testament rules say if she's pregnant and not married, stone her.
The New Testament rules say, how do we love her?
You feel the shift?
Stone her, love her.
Pre-Jesus, stone her, post-Jesus, love her.
Joseph was a righteous man, and he was looking for a more excellent way.
So he was just going to quietly divorce her so they didn't stone her, which was the law.
And he could have taken the opportunity to bring up her on charges.
And she would have been stoned to death.
But even before the angel got ahold of him, he said, I'm just going to take care of you in this way, Mary.
I'm going to quietly divorce you so that I can keep my world intact.
But I also don't have to deal with your transgressions my whole life.
But then the angels showed up.
I told the kids the angels are my favorites.
The angels showed up and it changed everything.
Angels are messengers from God.
We entertain angels all the time, unaware to us.
Angels bring good news.
Angels bring to us the rest of the story.
Angels bring to us the solution before we even know what the problem is.
Angels.
You don't hear me this morning.
The angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, Joseph's son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary as your wife or the child conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
I'm sorry, what?
The what?
Because remember the Holy Spirit hasn't come yet in the New Testament.
We know that the Holy Spirit was present at the beginning of time, but we don't have an awareness and a name for the Holy Spirit yet.
And yet the angel says, Joseph, that child is from the Holy Spirit.
And then the angel goes on to say, she will bear a son and you ought to name him Jesus, for he will save his people.
And then Joseph being a good Jew, he can go through his Torah, Rolodex, and he can remember that in Isaiah it says, look, the virgin shall become pregnant and give birth to a son, and they shall call him Emmanuel, which means God with us.
But just like the disciples later on, he knows it, but he doesn't know it.
He's heard it, but it's not real.
But when he woke up, he, something had changed.
Light had moved into the neighborhood.
There was a flashlight in the dark places, and it changed everything.
And he did what the Lord commended him, and he took her as his wife, and they named him Jesus.
Do you know what Jesus means?
Jesus is actually Matthew's Greek version of Yeshua.
What's Yeshua?
Joshua.
Do you remember that after Moses, there were two men who went into the promised land and they checked things out and they gave a minority report.
All the other elders said, we can't go into the promised land, Mary.
We can't go into the land that God has promised us where there will be milk and honey and all things will be well.
We can't go there because there are scary people there.
Joshua and Caleb.
They said, no.
It's good.
It's good and we should go.
We should go.
Don't listen to them.
The safe people want to stay safe.
The sick people want to stay stuck.
The people who don't like taking leaps and need a real firm sure thing.
They want to stay in the wilderness.
But we have seen the gift of the Lord ahead of us.
We have seen the light in the neighborhood.
We have seen the promises of God coming to fruition.
Moses died before they went into the promised land.
And Joshua took the people the rest of the way into the promised land.
Jesus, Yeshua, Joshua, takes the people from darkness into light, takes the people from disaster to hope,
takes the people from chaos to peace, takes the people from depression to joy, and takes the people from darkness to love.
The old song said I moved from my old house and I moved from my old friends and I moved from my old way of life.
They got I've moved out to a brand new life.
When Joseph woke up, he did as the angel of the Lord commanded him.
He took her as his wife, but had no marital relations with her until she had given birth to a son.
And he named him Jesus, which means the Lord saves.
to be continued this Wednesday at 6.30 PM as we celebrate Christmas Eve together.